Hi, everybody. Thanks for coming. My name is Marcos. I'll be talking about Python Web
Applications and how making them is easy. My background is in astronomy, but now I work
as a data science manager at CarMax where I do pricing algorithms, but I will not be
talking about space or car prices today, but making Python Web Apps. And by making a Python
Web Application and learning how to do it, you can better share your ideas, your code,
and your projects with a broad audience. So it's good to share your ideas. It's good to
share your stuff. My focus is really kind of on maybe open research or a side project.
I'm not really going to focus on kind of deploying a big dashboard for your company or a big
production app, but just kind of the basics of how these Web Application frameworks work
and how you can use them to kind of, you know, share your ideas with the world. And I do
think that once you have learned these tools or any of these tools, you can definitely
apply it at your day job. That's how it happened with me. I kind of taught myself Python Dash
just for my own edification, and then I did end up applying it, end up using it at my
job after I kind of taught it to myself for fun. So this is my hierarchy of sharing. It's
not really a hierarchy, but, you know, you have some idea. You found something cool.
You just do nothing. You just do nothing. But maybe you, like, cracked a lottery or
something. You don't want to tell people, so that's fine. You don't always want to tell
everyone everything. Then, you know, maybe you've got, like, a code snippet. You know,
maybe you have some cool function that does some interesting data production. You could
put that in a gist or a short blog post. Next thing, you can imagine, like, a GitHub repository
where you, you know, people can clone it and play around with the Jupyter Notebook or see
your datasets and such. Above that, again, this is more for code. You could make an installable
package and put it up on PyPi. That would be good. And then kind of above that, not
really above it, now we're kind of getting into some, not necessarily a hierarchy anymore,
but for certain applications, a static web app is a perfectly good way to share your
ideas. So we just heard a bunch of talks about Cordo in this room, so a great way to build
maybe some interactive plots, but also kind of describe some interesting stuff that you
found. But then somewhere at the top of this hierarchy is the interactive web app where
you can really kind of go back and forth. The users can interact with your application.
A web link has no friction. So one of the things I'm going to show is this semantic
emoji finder web app that I built, and it started as a function that you would just
return a pandas data frame, but then I built it out into a web app, and when I shared this
link with anyone, they can all kind of experience it without having to install Python, without
having to be a data scientist. They can just play with it, and it kind of broadens the
audience beyond maybe just other data scientists or other coders, et cetera. So you're thinking,
well, this sounds great, but this sounds hard. I don't know JavaScript. I don't know HTML.
Well, a web application framework like the ones I'm going to be talking about today will
do most of this hard work for you. They handle the server stuff. They handle the buttons.
They handle the interactivity, and you just get to write Python, and then the app kind
of springs to life for you. You don't have to write other languages. You don't need to
know JavaScript, CSS, et cetera. You can just write Python. A little CSS won't hurt. We'll
get to that. But the point is data scientists aren't web developers, so you can focus on
writing Python and what presumably you are comfortable doing.
So these are the ones I'm going to be talking about. Obviously, this whole session is about
Shiny, so I will talk about Shiny for Python at the end, but I'll also start off with a
stream in Dash, and then I'll kind of give an overview of some non-enterprise deployment
options if you want to put these apps out into the world for people to play with.
So this is the app we're going to be building. I needed a QR code for the end of this talk
because, as I think people have seen, it's very popular to put QR codes at the end of
a talk to link out to stuff, and I'll do that too. But when I went to make one on the web,
I got a lot of this. I got a lot of please log in, please sign up to download the QR
code, which I didn't really like. So I was like, well, I'll make one on my own, my own
computer. But then I thought, wait, this is a great app. Instead of doing it in Python
on my computer, I can make it into a little web app. So that's what we're going to do.
We're going to make a demo app. I made a demo app of QR Code Generator. We'll do that three
times in the three frameworks, and then I will show but not show code for that semantic
emoji search app that I talked about, just so you can see how I implemented it three
times. That's too much code to try and look at on a screen, but we'll look at that too.
All right, so Streamlet is the first one we'll talk about. I think they were bought by Snowflake
sometime in the last year plus. They will tell you that you have a Python script, you
sprinkle in some Streamlet, and then suddenly, lo and behold, you have a web app. Simple
things are simple in Streamlet, is how I like to describe it. So QR Code app, very simple.
It's kind of like in Streamlet's wheelhouse, very easy to implement. So you're going to
see that it's literally six lines of code to do this in Streamlet. Simple thing, simple.
I've kind of diagraphed it out here at the top. We've got the imports. Then we have an
st.txt input. That's going to be our variable. That's going to be set to the content variable,
and that's just going to be the little form on the page where you can type in a string.
Then we're going to check to see if that's truthy. Then we're going to use Segno, which
is a very nice library to make QR codes. It has no dependency, so that's why I picked
it. That's going to kind of create the QR code object, and then create the image data
that we need. We're going to pump that out of the app with st.image that will write the
image to the screen. You can see a screenshot there, what it looks like. We'll go ahead
and run it. Obviously, simple app, simple application, the perfect kind of use case
for Streamlet. There you go. Boom. We have a little QR code app. Let's see. The high-level
issue with Streamlet is it runs the entire script every time. For more complicated apps
and more complicated interactivity, that could become a problem. You might have two outputs.
You might have a very expensive function, like a model run or something. You have to
cache that. Those are considerations. I don't typically run into these, the kind of apps
that I build with Streamlet, but it is potentially a concern. The issue I ran into when I went
to show you the emoji search app is I just wasn't really satisfied with the look. It
works. I'm searching for launch. I'm getting a rocket, but the icons are kind of small.
I want this to be a table, but it's really two parallel columns because I couldn't get
the kind of tables I wanted out. It works. This is actually the first version of this
app that I wrote, but it really wasn't satisfying. It wasn't really scratching my itch, mostly
because of these layout issues, a little bit of a lack of control over how you lay it out.
Let's talk about Plotly Dash. Like I said, it's from Plotly. You may use their graphing
library and their plots, which are great. It's based on Flask and React. If you are
a web developer, you may have very strong opinions about React. I'm not, and I don't,
but it is based on React and Flask. One interesting thing about it, there's no what's called server
state. Every time you click a button in Dash, it's sending everything from your browser
to the server and back, which kind of makes it a little chatty sometimes if you're sending
a lot of stuff back and forth. Both Dash and Shiny, you explicitly define a layout. You
saw in Streamlit, there was no code saying what the layout's going to look like. Both
Shiny and Dash, you have to explicitly put a do layout. That might be some inputs, like
a text field, which is what we're going to have for the QR code app. It could be a little
pop-up menu. It could be a date picker. There's all kinds of different potential inputs you
could enter. Then we're going to have some kind of functions in Dash. These are called
callbacks. Then we're going to have outputs. For the QR code app, it's just going to be
an image, but you could imagine, of course, for a more data sciency app, a graph, a table,
maybe multiple things like that. One interesting thing about Dash is that it does not distinguish
between inputs and outputs. When you see the layout on the next screen, any of those things
that you will see could be an input or an output because Dash can read and write to
both, which is kind of neat. Here's the QR code app now implemented in Dash. It's just
showing the layout. I kind of skipped the imports so I could fit it all on the screen.
We're going to go through these one line by line. It's definitely more verbose than Streamlet,
right? Streamlet was six lines of code. Here, just my layout is 12 lines or something. HTML.h1,
and I said you wouldn't need to know CSS. That's CSS right there when it says style,
text align center. That's just making our headline. Then we've got a little Dash bootstrap
component. If you do make Dash apps, I really recommend using the Dash bootstrap components.
They're really useful. It makes things a little prettier. I'm using an input group to kind
of group the button and the text field together. Note that they both have IDs. We have this
keyword argument ID equals content and ID equals go. We'll need those later when we
want to make this app do something. We have an input and a button. Then we're going to
have our little image div to kind of take the data when the app does something. Again,
notice there's an ID. ID equals output image. Then there's a little CSS to style it, to
center it. That's where the stuff's going to go. How do we make it do something? That's
just a layout. It's not doing anything. Let's make it do something. That's with a Dash callback.
We have this decorator in front of the callback function. This is what kind of links all of
those elements to the function so it can actually do something to the app, to the application.
The output, we have every Dash callback can only have one output, which is somewhat of
a limitation. It might not be true anymore, but most of them have one output. That's obviously
going to be our image, and we're going to put it into the SRC source field of the image
output, which is where we want our data to go. Then we want the content, of course, of
the text field, and we want the go button to make this thing go. You notice that the
second one is state, not input. That is telling Dash, don't react when the content value changes.
When you start typing into that field, don't fire this function off. Only fire this function
off when input is clicked, so we get the number of clicks of that go button. Now,
the number of arguments in this callback function has to equal the number of inputs, so we have
one for content. That'll be our content variable, our string. Then the number of clicks is just
an integer that goes up. We don't really care what that number is, so we're going to just
throw it away and not worry about it and assign it to the underscore variable. Then this code
should look familiar, right? Same code we saw in the Streamline app. Make the QR code,
return the data. Then this is kind of boilerplate to make the app run locally on your computer.
This is what the app looks like. I think it looks a little nicer. We got a nice little
bootstrap button there. We got a nice little centered everything. I think it looks nice.
This has been deployed. I have a version of this. It has a little added a download button,
so this is deployed on my website. There'll be a link to that later. I think this works
pretty well. Let's look at the complicated app, write the emoji search. Again, no code,
just looking at it. This is the canonical version of this app. This is the version that I like.
This is the version that I send people. I've got a nice font. I've got these settings,
these hideable settings where you can surface and priorities of search results for skin color
or gender. There's actually a font adjustment scale if you want more results or you want more
bigger font. I love this version. This is the version I send to people. It works very well.
All right. Now, this is a Shiny session, so probably a lot of people here know more about
Shiny than I do. Let's go ahead and look at Shiny for Python, how I did this in that app.
Obviously, Shiny for Python was announced only a year ago, so it's very young. I did start in
Shiny. I built our Shiny apps way back when, before I became mostly a Python person. I was
very excited when this was announced. It was fun to play with it and try and re-implement some of
the things that I built and other frameworks in Shiny for Python. Much like Dash, we're going to
explicitly lay out the UI. Of course, instead of using Dash functions, we're going to use Shiny
functions. We're going to make a little page wrapper. Instead of a HTML.h1, we've got a UI.panel
title, but the same idea. We're going to make a title. I'm taking advantage of this cool sidebar
layout that's built into Shiny. We're going to have the text field and the button in a little
small panel, and then the image in a right panel. You notice that there's also an id keyword
argument to identify the elements. We have id equals text and id equals go to label the input
text and the go button. Then we're going to have a output UI with the id qr code to hold the image.
Notice that unlike Dash, the inputs and outputs are explicit here. We have the inputs all start
with input and the outputs start with output, because unlike Dash, they're separated into two
classes. Unlike a callback, Shiny has these Shiny server functions. Instead of one long decorator,
we have two short decorators. Output tells the Shiny server this is going to make output,
and then render UI says the kind of element it's creating. It could just be render.text,
for example, if you were just outputting text. Again, unlike Dash, where we have to tell it in
the callback what's an input, what's a state, Shiny just figures it out based on what's in
the function. Input.go is the variable. Is this the button? It's a number. Then input.text will
be the string we want to convert. I only want it to fire off when I hit input.go. I just have this
throwaway function here to make sure that this function will fire off with the go button. Then I
isolate the input.text field, so when input.text changes, this function doesn't keep running over
and over again every time you type a new letter. There's another way to do this with a different
decorator, but I implemented it this way. Anyway, the rest of this looks familiar. This is the same
conditional, the same stuff. It looks a little different, the syntax, but we're making the QR
code and we're sending it out to the app. Then this is more boilerplate, just to create the app
in the script. Here is the Shiny QR code implemented once again, now in Shiny. Looks
pretty nice. I like the sidebar layout. I've implemented a version of this as well and put
it on my Shiny server. If you want to make QR codes with this app, it's out there and I will
send a link, show a link at the end. All right, so here is semantic emoji search with Shiny.
I did not try to implement the settings for various reasons that I can get into,
but I think it looks nice. This thing at the bottom is a bootstrap table. I built a little
function that I linked to there that is turning a Pandas DataFrame into a bootstrap table.
It is also passing in a special function to customize that right column, because obviously
that right column is not just a single text field. It's got a lot of stuff going on in it.
I made that customizable. That's a little beta, but it's out there if people want to play with it.
All right, let's talk about deployment. This is, again, non-enterprise deployment.
Obviously, there are a lot of knowledgeable people here at this conference to talk about
enterprise deployment. There's Posit Connect, which can actually deploy all three of these
things, but let's just talk about you as a hobbyist wanting to deploy things.
I'm probably preaching to the choir here, but Shiny has a lot of nice ways to
deploy small apps to Shiny server, which I have installed on my web server. It's free. It's open
source. It does require you to have some kind of cloud web server. I have one myself, but you do
have to understand that, so not necessarily super easy if you're not familiar with setting up a web
server. ShinyApps.io, which I hadn't used until this week, very easy to use, very easy to deploy
a small app on ShinyApps.io. Obviously, if your app is really big or really memory intensive,
you might need to use a paid tier. Then ShinyLive.io, also a pretty new idea to run some of
these simpler apps in a browser, which is another way to do it. Streamlit has something very similar
to ShinyApps.io called Streamlit Community Cloud. You just point it to a GitHub repository, and it
brings up a little Streamlit app, but also limitations on how much RAM that has and stuff,
so you can't run a really big app that way, and limited by GitHub's file size limits.
Then ironically, I've deployed probably seven to eight dash apps on my own website, but I cannot
call it particularly easy. I did write a whole blog post about how I do it. It is a standard,
what they call a WSGI Python application, but it is not particularly trivial to deploy. You can also
use things like Heroku or Python Anywhere, but happy to talk more about deployment things
if you want. I would encourage you to not really worry about deployment at first, just kind of
play around with one of these frameworks, play with all of them, run them locally. I think when I first
started using these at my day job, I was just running it locally, and that actually got a lot
of value out of that. But you will get emotionally involved if you start making these apps. You will
want it to run. You want it to look pretty. You want it to look a certain way, and then you want
to share it with the world. You will eventually probably want to deploy it, but there are ways
to do that. I think that's the end. I want to thank all of you. I want to thank my managers
at Carmex for helping me come out here, and I'm happy to take a few questions.
And that is the QR code to my talk notes. It's like a little blog post I wrote. It has links
to all the official documentation. It has links to all the demo repositories. It has links to the
live apps that I've deployed, and I'm on the Discord if people want to tag me in the Python
channel or anywhere else. I'm happy to take a few questions if we have any. We have some questions
for Marcos. The first question is for app layouts in Dash. Is there a way to refactor the layout
into a class or functions to make it more readable and modular, I guess? That's a good
question. A lot of people, when Dash apps get more complicated, they break it out into a separate
file and import it into the main file so it doesn't pollute your one big file. You can also
break it out into sub, not function, but sub variables. That's what I usually do when I write
a Dash layout. I'll have variable equals this is the output page, and I'll make that a variable,
and this is the input section. I'll make that a variable. That helps clean it up a little bit
so that it's a little easier to follow instead of one big block of nested Python lists and stuff.
Next question is, what's the best way for a Python developer to learn enough CSS to be dangerous?
That is a great question. I tend to steal other people's CSS, is usually my advice,
so that every one of these frameworks lets you sprinkle in CSS a little differently.
Dash has these Python dictionaries that match the keywords. I think Shiny, you put the whole
CSS string in there. CSS is always an adventure. I think I've tried to get one of these things
centered. It took me a lot longer than it should have. I'm always Googling CSS. It is always a
challenge. Like I said, you get emotionally involved. You're like, I want this to be
centered, and then you spend a lot of time trying to figure out the CSS to get it centered.
Okay. Let's thank Marcos for a great talk.